---
title: Insert title here
key: 0060d481e875f90c31d30281e70c323a

---
## Identifying Missing Data

```yaml
type: "TitleSlide"
key: "0a84141330"
```

`@lower_third`

name: Rob O'Callaghan
title: undefined


`@script`
In the first chapter we took a look at the different types of data one may find when performing an analyses. In this lesson we will explore the concept of messy and missing data, how to find it, and once identified, how to deal with it


---
## How Gaps in Data Occur

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "d478376e4a"
center_content: false
```

`@part1`
- Data not being collected properly{{}} 
- Collection and management errors 
- Data intentionally being omitted 
- Could be created due to transformations of the data


`@script`
While in an ideal world every data set you come across would be perfectly complete and contain no gaps. Unfortunately this is rarely the case.
Real world data often has noise or omissions. This can stem from many sources for example::
Data not being collected properly (paper surveys not being filled out correctly)
Collection and management errors Someone transcribing the data making a mistake
Data intentionally being omitted (people may want to skip the age box in  an online form)
Could be created due to transformations of the data (eg average of ???)
But this list is far from comprehensive


---
## Why we care?

```yaml
type: "FullSlide"
key: "0869e89a5f"
```

`@part1`
- Some models cannot work with nulls
- Missing data may be a sign of a wider data issue
- Missing data can be a useful feature


`@script`
You may wonder why missing data matters so much but it is extremely important to identify and deal with missing data. 
Many machine learning models cannot work with gaps in the data (for example if you were performing linear regression, you would need a value for every row and column you wished to use in your data set)
Missing data may may be indicative of a problem in your data pipeline, if there is consistently missing data from a certain field it it should be investigated and acted upon
Missing data may provide information in itself. For example if the number of children of a person is missing they may have no children.

Now that we have established how data may be incomplete, and why that is an issue, lets work through how one can see if their data set has gaps in it, and where these gaps occur if it does


---
## Gap discovery

```yaml
type: "TwoRows"
key: "121a452bab"
```

`@part1`
```python
import pandas pd
df = pd.read_csv("titanic.csv")
df.head()
```


`@part2`
```python
df.info()
```


`@script`
We will be using the Titanic data set for this example available on Kaggle.com.
Upon using pandas to load the dataset we can see this dataset contains high level details of the passengers of the Titanic's maiden voyage such as their ticket class, their age, their cabin number and whether they survived. But do we know how complete this data set is?

Using df.info() can give us a preliminary look into how complete this data set is:
Right from the get go we can see that Cabin and Age are highly underpopulated and we should examine where these gaps occur. This list output is useful, but becomes limited with larger datasets that have nulls scattered all over


---
## Hands on

```yaml
type: "TwoRows"
key: "d126f67a7a"
```

`@part1`
`df.isnull()`


`@part2`
`import seaborn as sns`

`sns.heatmap(df.isnull(), cbar=False, yticklabels=False, cmap="Blues")`


`@script`
To improve on this we can try to visualize where the nulls are. By using df.isnull() we can find the locations of these gaps represented by the true values here.
This on its own is not particularly insightful so we can plot the results using seaborn.
Here we can see that there 

Note that although the table of true and false values was not very easy to digest, we will see in the following chapters that these values can be easily used to apply tranformations to only the nully rows.


---
## Final Slide

```yaml
type: "FinalSlide"
key: "235f0a872e"
```

`@script`
In this lesson we have explored how to identify nulls in a data set and where they exist. In the next lessons we will be addressing how to handle these nulls for different data types.

